Building a custom rviz display (#3384)
ros2/ros2_documentation: source/Tutorials/Intermediate/RViz/RViz-Custom-Display/RViz-Custom-Display.rst

Building a Custom RViz Display
==============================

> `rviz_plugin_tutorial <https://github.com/MetroRobots/rviz_plugin_tutorial>`__: A tutorial on how to make rviz plugins

Reviewer: ```suggestion
`rviz_plugin_tutorial <https://github.com/MetroRobots/rviz_plugin_tutorial>`__: A tutorial on how to make RViz plugins
```

Point2D Message
---------------

> We'll be playing with a toy message defined in the ``rviz_plugin_tutorial_msgs``  package: ``Point2D.msg``:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We'll be playing with a toy message defined in the ``rviz_plugin_tutorial_msgs`` package: ``Point2D.msg``:
```

.. code-block::

   std_msgs/Header header
   float64 x
   float64 y

Boilerplate for Basic Plugin
----------------------------

Strap in, there's a lot of code. You can view the full version of this code with the branch name ``step1``.

Header File
^^^^^^^^^^^

Here are the contents of ``point_display.hpp``

.. code-block:: c++

>    #pragma once

Reviewer: do you mind to use include guards? as we are doing on RViz ?

If you are using the common linters probaby it will require this

```cpp
#ifndef BLAH_H
#define BLAH_H

#endif  // BLAH_H
```

Author: I was going to argue with you about using modern standards, but then I dug and found [this bit of the Google guide](https://google.github.io/styleguide/cppguide.html#The__define_Guard). 

That's not going to stop me from posting a gif that came to mind. 

![I recognize the council has made a decision, but given that it's a stupid-ass decision, I've elected to ignore it.](https://i.pinimg.com/originals/54/8b/ca/548bca91b75d0911b697e8c2733996d0.gif)

(I'm not calling this a stupid decision, because upon further research, pragma is generally supported but is not official lore)

.. code-block:: cmake

   find_package(ament_cmake_ros REQUIRED)
   find_package(pluginlib REQUIRED)
   find_package(rviz_common REQUIRED)
   find_package(rviz_plugin_tutorial_msgs REQUIRED)

   set(CMAKE_AUTOMOC ON)
   qt5_wrap_cpp(MOC_FILES
     include/rviz_plugin_tutorial/point_display.hpp
   )

   add_library(point_display src/point_display.cpp ${MOC_FILES})
   target_include_directories(point_display PUBLIC
     $<BUILD_INTERFACE:${CMAKE_CURRENT_SOURCE_DIR}/include>
     $<INSTALL_INTERFACE:include>
   )
   ament_target_dependencies(point_display
     pluginlib
     rviz_common
     rviz_plugin_tutorial_msgs
   )
   install(TARGETS point_display
           EXPORT export_rviz_plugin_tutorial
           ARCHIVE DESTINATION lib
           LIBRARY DESTINATION lib
           RUNTIME DESTINATION bin
   )
   install(DIRECTORY include/
           DESTINATION include
   )
   install(FILES rviz_common_plugins.xml
           DESTINATION share/${PROJECT_NAME}
   )
   ament_export_include_directories(include)
   ament_export_targets(export_rviz_plugin_tutorial)
   pluginlib_export_plugin_description_file(rviz_common rviz_common_plugins.xml)

> * To generate the proper QT files, we need to

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* To generate the proper Qt files, we need to
```

* The actual visualization that we've been building to this entire time is in the last four lines: we set the position of the visualization to match the message's position.

The result should look like this:

.. image:: images/Step2A.png
   :target: images/Step2A.png
   :alt: screenshot of functioning display

If the box does not appear in that location, it might be because

* You are not publishing the topic at this time
* The message hasn't been published in the last 2 seconds.
* You did not properly set the topic in RViz.

It's Nice to Have Options.
--------------------------

If you want to allow users to customize different properties of the visualization, you need to add `rviz_common::Property objects <https://github.com/ros2/rviz/tree/ros2/rviz_common/include/rviz_common/properties>`_.

You can view the full version of this step with the branch name ``step3``.

Header Updates
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

* ``#include <rviz_common/properties/color_property.hpp>`` Color is but one of many properties you can set.

.. code-block:: c++

  private Q_SLOTS:
    void updateStyle();

> * This gets called whenever the gui is changed, via QT's SLOT/SIGNAL framework.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* This gets called whenever the gui is changed, via Qt's SLOT/SIGNAL framework.
```

* ``std::unique_ptr<rviz_common::properties::ColorProperty> color_property_;`` The property itself.

Cpp Updates
^^^^^^^^^^^

> * ``#include <rviz_common/properties/parse_color.hpp>`` - Contains helper function to convert property to ogre color.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* ``#include <rviz_common/properties/parse_color.hpp>`` - Contains helper function to convert property to OGRE color.
```

> 

Reviewer 2: Unnecessary whitespace.

```suggestion
```

Building a Custom RViz Display
==============================

> `rviz_plugin_tutorial <https://github.com/MetroRobots/rviz_plugin_tutorial>`__: A tutorial on how to make RViz plugins

Reviewer 2: I'll suggest we have a little more intro here, explaining what we are doing in this tutorial and why.  Similar to our other tutorials like http://docs.ros.org/en/rolling/Tutorials/Intermediate/Writing-an-Action-Server-Client/Cpp.html (the `Background` section in particular).

Reviewer 2: It would also be worthwhile mentioning here that we'll be changing branches on the above repository as we go along, since this is a different "structure" than most of the rest of the tutorials.

   float64 y

Boilerplate for Basic Plugin
----------------------------

Strap in, there's a lot of code. You can view the full version of this code with the branch name ``step1``.

Header File
^^^^^^^^^^^

Here are the contents of ``point_display.hpp``

.. code-block:: c++

   #ifndef RVIZ_PLUGIN_TUTORIAL__POINT_DISPLAY_HPP_
   #define RVIZ_PLUGIN_TUTORIAL__POINT_DISPLAY_HPP_

   #include <rviz_common/message_filter_display.hpp>
   #include <rviz_plugin_tutorial_msgs/msg/point2_d.hpp>

   namespace rviz_plugin_tutorial
   {
   class PointDisplay : public rviz_common::MessageFilterDisplay<rviz_plugin_tutorial_msgs::msg::Point2D>
   {
     Q_OBJECT

   protected:
     void processMessage(const rviz_plugin_tutorial_msgs::msg::Point2D::ConstSharedPtr msg) override;
   };
   }  // namespace rviz_plugin_tutorial

   #endif  // RVIZ_PLUGIN_TUTORIAL__POINT_DISPLAY_HPP_

* We're implementing the `MessageFilterDisplay <https://github.com/ros2/rviz/blob/0ef2b56373b98b5536f0f817c11dc2b5549f391d/rviz_common/include/rviz_common/message_filter_display.hpp#L43>`__ class which can be used with any message with a ``std_msgs/Header``.
* The class is templated with our ``Point2D`` message type.

> * For reasons outside the scope of this tutorial, you need the ``Q_OBJECT`` macro in there to get the QT parts of the gui to work.

Reviewer 2: Could we possibly have a link to some Qt documentation that explains it?

> * ``processMessage`` is the only method that needs to be implemented, which we'll do the cpp file.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* ``processMessage`` is the only method that needs to be implemented, which we'll do in the cpp file.
```

Source File
^^^^^^^^^^^

``point_display.cpp``

.. code-block:: c++

   #include <rviz_plugin_tutorial/point_display.hpp>
   #include <rviz_common/logging.hpp>

   namespace rviz_plugin_tutorial
   {
   void PointDisplay::processMessage(const rviz_plugin_tutorial_msgs::msg::Point2D::ConstSharedPtr msg)
   {
     RVIZ_COMMON_LOG_INFO_STREAM("We got a message with frame " << msg->header.frame_id);
   }
   }  // namespace rviz_plugin_tutorial

   #include <pluginlib/class_list_macros.hpp>
   PLUGINLIB_EXPORT_CLASS(rviz_plugin_tutorial::PointDisplay, rviz_common::Display)

> * The logging is not strictly necessary.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* The logging is not strictly necessary, but helps with debugging.
```

* In order for RViz to find our plugin, we need this ``PLUGINLIB`` invocation in our code (as well as other things below)

package.xml
^^^^^^^^^^^

We need the following three dependencies in our package.xml:

.. code-block:: xml

     <depend>pluginlib</depend>
     <depend>rviz_common</depend>
     <depend>rviz_plugin_tutorial_msgs</depend>

rviz_common_plugins.xml
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

.. code-block:: xml

   <library path="point_display">
     <class type="rviz_plugin_tutorial::PointDisplay" base_class_type="rviz_common::Display">
       <description></description>
     </class>
   </library>

* This is standard ``pluginlib`` code.

  * The library ``path`` is the name of the library we'll assign in the CMake.
  * The class should match the ``PLUGINLIB`` invocation from above.

* We'll come back to the description later, I promise.

CMakeLists.txt
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

> Everyone loves how verbose CMake files are in ROS 2! The following lines are on top of the standard boilerplate.

Reviewer 2: I'm not sure this belongs in the official tutorials like this.  Here's a rewrite:

```suggestion
Add the following lines to the top of the standard boilerplate.
```

   find_package(rviz_plugin_tutorial_msgs REQUIRED)

   set(CMAKE_AUTOMOC ON)
   qt5_wrap_cpp(MOC_FILES
     include/rviz_plugin_tutorial/point_display.hpp
   )

   add_library(point_display src/point_display.cpp ${MOC_FILES})
   target_include_directories(point_display PUBLIC
     $<BUILD_INTERFACE:${CMAKE_CURRENT_SOURCE_DIR}/include>
     $<INSTALL_INTERFACE:include>
   )
   ament_target_dependencies(point_display
     pluginlib
     rviz_common
     rviz_plugin_tutorial_msgs
   )
   install(TARGETS point_display
           EXPORT export_rviz_plugin_tutorial
           ARCHIVE DESTINATION lib
           LIBRARY DESTINATION lib
           RUNTIME DESTINATION bin
   )
   install(DIRECTORY include/
           DESTINATION include
   )
   install(FILES rviz_common_plugins.xml
           DESTINATION share/${PROJECT_NAME}
   )
   ament_export_include_directories(include)
   ament_export_targets(export_rviz_plugin_tutorial)
   pluginlib_export_plugin_description_file(rviz_common rviz_common_plugins.xml)

* To generate the proper Qt files, we need to
  A) Turn ``CMAKE_AUTOMOC`` on
  B) Wrap the headers by calling ``qt5_wrap_cpp`` with each header that has ``Q_OBJECT`` in it.

>   C) Include the ``MOC_FILES`` in the library alongside our other cpp files.

Reviewer 2: I think you can do this with `.rst` with `#.`.

> * Note that if you do NOT wrap your header files, you may get an error message when attempting to load the plugin at runtime, along the lines of:
>   .. code-block::

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* Note that if you do NOT wrap your header files, you may get an error message when attempting to load the plugin at runtime, along the lines of:

  .. code-block::
```

     [rviz2]: PluginlibFactory: The plugin for class 'rviz_plugin_tutorial::PointDisplay' failed to load. Error: Failed to load library /home/ros/ros2_ws/install/rviz_plugin_tutorial/lib/libpoint_display.so. Make sure that you are calling the PLUGINLIB_EXPORT_CLASS macro in the library code, and that names are consistent between this macro and your XML. Error string: Could not load library LoadLibrary error: /home/ros/ros2_ws/install/rviz_plugin_tutorial/lib/libpoint_display.so: undefined symbol: _ZTVN20rviz_plugin_tutorial12PointDisplayE, at /tmp/binarydeb/ros-foxy-rcutils-1.1.4/src/shared_library.c:84

* A lot of the other code ensures that the plugin portion works. Namely, calling ``pluginlib_export_plugin_description_file`` is essential to getting RViz to find your new plugin.

Testing it out
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

> Compile your code and run ``rviz2``. You should be able to add your new plugin by clicking ``Add`` in the bottom left, and then selecting your package/plugin.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Compile your code and run ``rviz2``.
You should be able to add your new plugin by clicking ``Add`` in the bottom left, and then selecting your package/plugin.
```

.. image:: images/Step1A.png
   :target: images/Step1A.png
   :alt: screenshot of adding display

Initially, the display will be in an error state because you have yet to assign a topic.

.. image:: images/Step1B.png
   :target: images/Step1B.png
   :alt: screenshot of error state

> Let's put the topic ``/point`` and it should load fine, although not display anything.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
If we put the topic ``/point`` in, it should load fine but not display anything.
```

* We also add a pointer to our shape object: ``std::unique_ptr<rviz_rendering::Shape> point_shape_;``

Then in the cpp file, we define the ``onInitialize`` method:

.. code-block:: c++

   void PointDisplay::onInitialize()
   {
     MFDClass::onInitialize();
     point_shape_ =
         std::make_unique<rviz_rendering::Shape>(rviz_rendering::Shape::Type::Cube, scene_manager_, scene_node_);
   }

* ``MFDClass`` is `aliased <https://github.com/ros2/rviz/blob/0ef2b56373b98b5536f0f817c11dc2b5549f391d/rviz_common/include/rviz_common/message_filter_display.hpp#L57>`_ to the templated parent class for convenience.
* The shape object must be constructed here in the ``onInitialize`` method rather than the constructor because otherwise ``scene_manager_`` and ``scene_node_`` would not be ready.

We also update our ``processMessage`` method:

.. code-block:: c++

   void PointDisplay::processMessage(const rviz_plugin_tutorial_msgs::msg::Point2D::ConstSharedPtr msg)
   {
     RVIZ_COMMON_LOG_INFO_STREAM("We got a message with frame " << msg->header.frame_id);

     Ogre::Vector3 position;
     Ogre::Quaternion orientation;

>      if (!context_->getFrameManager()->getTransform(msg->header, position, orientation))
>      {

Reviewer 2: This isn't our usual style for ROS 2.  The usual style for conditionals and loops is:

```suggestion
     if (!context_->getFrameManager()->getTransform(msg->header, position, orientation)) {
```

Reviewer 2: (same goes for a bunch of the other C++ code in this tutorial)

       RVIZ_COMMON_LOG_DEBUG_STREAM("Error transforming from frame '" << msg->header.frame_id << "' to frame '"
                                                                      << qPrintable(fixed_frame_) << "'");
     }

     scene_node_->setPosition(position);
     scene_node_->setOrientation(orientation);

     Ogre::Vector3 point_pos;
     point_pos.x = msg->x;
     point_pos.y = msg->y;
     point_shape_->setPosition(point_pos);
   }

* We need to get the proper frame for our message and transform the ``scene_node_`` accordingly. This ensures that the visualization does not always appear relative to the fixed frame.

> * The actual visualization that we've been building to this entire time is in the last four lines: we set the position of the visualization to match the message's position.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* The actual visualization that we've been building up to is in the last four lines: we set the position of the visualization to match the message's position.
```

The result should look like this:

.. image:: images/Step2A.png
   :target: images/Step2A.png
   :alt: screenshot of functioning display

> If the box does not appear in that location, it might be because
> 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
If the box does not appear in that location, it might be because:
```

Cpp Updates
^^^^^^^^^^^

* ``#include <rviz_common/properties/parse_color.hpp>`` - Contains helper function to convert property to OGRE color.
* To our ``onInitialize`` we add

.. code-block:: c++

    color_property_ = std::make_unique<rviz_common::properties::ColorProperty>(
        "Point Color", QColor(36, 64, 142), "Color to draw the point.", this, SLOT(updateStyle()));
    updateStyle();

* This constructs the object with its name, default value, description and the callback.
* We call ``updateStyle`` directly so that the color is set at the beginning even before the property is changed.

* Then we define the callback.

.. code-block:: c++

    void PointDisplay::updateStyle()
    {
      Ogre::ColourValue color = rviz_common::properties::qtToOgre(color_property_->getColor());
      point_shape_->setColor(color);
    }

The result should look like this:

.. image:: images/Step3A.png
   :target: images/Step3A.png
   :alt: screenshot with color property

Ooh, pink!

.. image:: images/Step3B.png
   :target: images/Step3B.png
   :alt: screenshot with changed color

Status Report
-------------

You can view the full version of this step with the branch name ``step4``.

> You can also set the status of the display. As an arbitrary example, let's make our display show a warning when the x coordinate is negative, because why not? In ``processMessage``\ :

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
You can also set the status of the display.
As an arbitrary example, let's make our display show a warning when the x coordinate is negative, because why not?
In ``processMessage``:
```

.. code-block:: c++

     if (msg->x < 0)
     {
       setStatus(StatusProperty::Warn, "Message", "I will complain about points with negative x values.");
     }
     else
     {
       setStatus(StatusProperty::Ok, "Message", "OK");
     }

* We're assuming a previous ``using rviz_common::properties::StatusProperty;`` declaration.
* Think of the status as Key/Value pairs, with the key being some string (here we're using ``"Message"``\ ) and the values are the status level (error/warn/ok) and the description (some other string).

.. image:: images/Step4A.png
   :target: images/Step4A.png
   :alt: screenshot with ok status

.. image:: images/Step4B.png
   :target: images/Step4B.png
   :alt: screenshot with warning status

Cleanup
-------

> Now its time to clean it up a bit. This makes things look nicer and be a little easier to use, but aren't strictly required. You can view the full version of this step with the branch name ``step5``.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Now its time to clean it up a bit.
This makes things look nicer and be a little easier to use, but aren't strictly required.
You can view the full version of this step with the branch name ``step5``.
```

First, we update the plugin declaration.

.. code-block:: xml

   <library path="point_display">
     <class name="Point2D" type="rviz_plugin_tutorial::PointDisplay" base_class_type="rviz_common::Display">
       <description>Tutorial to display a point</description>
       <message_type>rviz_plugin_tutorial_msgs/msg/Point2D</message_type>
     </class>
   </library>

* We add the ``name`` field to the ``class`` tag. This changes the name that is displayed in RViz. In code, it makes sense to call it a ``PointDisplay`` but in RViz, we want to simplify.
* We put actual text into the description. Don't be lazy.
* By declaring the specific message type here, when you attempt to add a Display by Topic, it will suggest this plugin for the topics of that type.

> We also add an icon for the plugin at ``icons/classes/Point2D.png``. The folder is hardcoded, and the filename should match the name from the plugin declaration (or the name of the class if not specified). `[icon source] <https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Free_software_icon.svg>`_

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
We also add an icon for the plugin at ``icons/classes/Point2D.png``.
The folder is hardcoded, and the filename should match the name from the plugin declaration (or the name of the class if not specified). `[icon source] <https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Free_software_icon.svg>`_
```

Background
----------
There are many types of data that have existing visualizations in RViz. However, if there is a message type that does
not yet have a plugin to display it, there are two choices to see it in RViz.

 1. Convert the message to another type, such as `visualization_msgs/Marker`.
 2. Write a Custom RViz Display.

With the first option, there is more network traffic and limitations to how the data can be represented. It is also quick and flexible.
The latter option is explained in this tutorial. It takes a bit of work, but can lead to much richer visualizations.

All of the code for this tutorial can be found in `this repository <https://github.com/MetroRobots/rviz_plugin_tutorial>`__.
In order to see the incremental progress of the plugin written in this tutorial,
the repository has different branches (``step2``, ``step3``...) that can each be compiled and run as you go.

Point2D Message
---------------

We'll be playing with a toy message defined in the ``rviz_plugin_tutorial_msgs`` package: ``Point2D.msg``:

.. code-block::

   std_msgs/Header header
   float64 x
   float64 y

Boilerplate for Basic Plugin
----------------------------

> Strap in, there's a lot of code. You can view the full version of this code with the branch name ``step1``.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Strap in, there's a lot of code.
You can view the full version of this code with the branch name ``step1``.
```

Header File
^^^^^^^^^^^

Here are the contents of ``point_display.hpp``

.. code-block:: c++

   #ifndef RVIZ_PLUGIN_TUTORIAL__POINT_DISPLAY_HPP_
   #define RVIZ_PLUGIN_TUTORIAL__POINT_DISPLAY_HPP_

   #include <rviz_common/message_filter_display.hpp>
   #include <rviz_plugin_tutorial_msgs/msg/point2_d.hpp>

   namespace rviz_plugin_tutorial
   {
   class PointDisplay
     : public rviz_common::MessageFilterDisplay<rviz_plugin_tutorial_msgs::msg::Point2D>
   {
     Q_OBJECT

   protected:
     void processMessage(const rviz_plugin_tutorial_msgs::msg::Point2D::ConstSharedPtr msg) override;
   };
   }  // namespace rviz_plugin_tutorial

   #endif  // RVIZ_PLUGIN_TUTORIAL__POINT_DISPLAY_HPP_

* We're implementing the `MessageFilterDisplay <https://github.com/ros2/rviz/blob/0ef2b56373b98b5536f0f817c11dc2b5549f391d/rviz_common/include/rviz_common/message_filter_display.hpp#L43>`__ class which can be used with any message with a ``std_msgs/Header``.
* The class is templated with our ``Point2D`` message type.

> * `For reasons outside the scope of this tutorial <https://doc.qt.io/archives/qt-4.8/moc.html>`__, you need the ``Q_OBJECT`` macro in there to get the QT parts of the gui to work.

Reviewer 2: Since we depend on Qt-5, let's point to the Qt5 version of this document:

```suggestion
* `For reasons outside the scope of this tutorial <https://doc.qt.io/qt-5/moc.html>`__, you need the ``Q_OBJECT`` macro in there to get the QT parts of the GUI to work.
```

* ``processMessage`` is the only method that needs to be implemented, which we'll do in the cpp file.

Source File
^^^^^^^^^^^

``point_display.cpp``

.. code-block:: c++

   #include <rviz_plugin_tutorial/point_display.hpp>
   #include <rviz_common/logging.hpp>

   namespace rviz_plugin_tutorial
   {
   void PointDisplay::processMessage(const rviz_plugin_tutorial_msgs::msg::Point2D::ConstSharedPtr msg)
   {
     RVIZ_COMMON_LOG_INFO_STREAM("We got a message with frame " << msg->header.frame_id);
   }
   }  // namespace rviz_plugin_tutorial

   #include <pluginlib/class_list_macros.hpp>
   PLUGINLIB_EXPORT_CLASS(rviz_plugin_tutorial::PointDisplay, rviz_common::Display)

* The logging is not strictly necessary, but helps with debugging.

> * In order for RViz to find our plugin, we need this ``PLUGINLIB`` invocation in our code (as well as other things below)

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* In order for RViz to find our plugin, we need this ``PLUGINLIB`` invocation in our code (as well as other things below).
```

   find_package(ament_cmake_ros REQUIRED)
   find_package(pluginlib REQUIRED)
   find_package(rviz_common REQUIRED)
   find_package(rviz_plugin_tutorial_msgs REQUIRED)

   set(CMAKE_AUTOMOC ON)
   qt5_wrap_cpp(MOC_FILES
     include/rviz_plugin_tutorial/point_display.hpp
   )

   add_library(point_display src/point_display.cpp ${MOC_FILES})
   target_include_directories(point_display PUBLIC
     $<BUILD_INTERFACE:${CMAKE_CURRENT_SOURCE_DIR}/include>
     $<INSTALL_INTERFACE:include>
   )
   ament_target_dependencies(point_display
     pluginlib
     rviz_common
     rviz_plugin_tutorial_msgs
   )
   install(TARGETS point_display
           EXPORT export_rviz_plugin_tutorial
           ARCHIVE DESTINATION lib
           LIBRARY DESTINATION lib
           RUNTIME DESTINATION bin
   )
   install(DIRECTORY include/
           DESTINATION include
   )
   install(FILES rviz_common_plugins.xml
           DESTINATION share/${PROJECT_NAME}
   )
   ament_export_include_directories(include)
   ament_export_targets(export_rviz_plugin_tutorial)
   pluginlib_export_plugin_description_file(rviz_common rviz_common_plugins.xml)

* To generate the proper Qt files, we need to

>   * Turn ``CMAKE_AUTOMOC`` on

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  * Turn ``CMAKE_AUTOMOC`` on.
```

  * Wrap the headers by calling ``qt5_wrap_cpp`` with each header that has ``Q_OBJECT`` in it.
  * Include the ``MOC_FILES`` in the library alongside our other cpp files.

* Note that if you do NOT wrap your header files, you may get an error message when attempting to load the plugin at runtime, along the lines of:

  .. code-block::

     [rviz2]: PluginlibFactory: The plugin for class 'rviz_plugin_tutorial::PointDisplay' failed to load. Error: Failed to load library /home/ros/ros2_ws/install/rviz_plugin_tutorial/lib/libpoint_display.so. Make sure that you are calling the PLUGINLIB_EXPORT_CLASS macro in the library code, and that names are consistent between this macro and your XML. Error string: Could not load library LoadLibrary error: /home/ros/ros2_ws/install/rviz_plugin_tutorial/lib/libpoint_display.so: undefined symbol: _ZTVN20rviz_plugin_tutorial12PointDisplayE, at /tmp/binarydeb/ros-foxy-rcutils-1.1.4/src/shared_library.c:84

> * A lot of the other code ensures that the plugin portion works. Namely, calling ``pluginlib_export_plugin_description_file`` is essential to getting RViz to find your new plugin.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* A lot of the other code ensures that the plugin portion works.
Namely, calling ``pluginlib_export_plugin_description_file`` is essential to getting RViz to find your new plugin.
```

* The shape object must be constructed here in the ``onInitialize`` method rather than the constructor because otherwise ``scene_manager_`` and ``scene_node_`` would not be ready.

We also update our ``processMessage`` method:

.. code-block:: c++

   void PointDisplay::processMessage(const rviz_plugin_tutorial_msgs::msg::Point2D::ConstSharedPtr msg)
   {
     RVIZ_COMMON_LOG_INFO_STREAM("We got a message with frame " << msg->header.frame_id);

     Ogre::Vector3 position;
     Ogre::Quaternion orientation;
     if (!context_->getFrameManager()->getTransform(msg->header, position, orientation)) {
       RVIZ_COMMON_LOG_DEBUG_STREAM("Error transforming from frame '" << msg->header.frame_id <<
           "' to frame '" << qPrintable(fixed_frame_) << "'");
     }

     scene_node_->setPosition(position);
     scene_node_->setOrientation(orientation);

     Ogre::Vector3 point_pos;
     point_pos.x = msg->x;
     point_pos.y = msg->y;
     point_shape_->setPosition(point_pos);
   }

> * We need to get the proper frame for our message and transform the ``scene_node_`` accordingly. This ensures that the visualization does not always appear relative to the fixed frame.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* We need to get the proper frame for our message and transform the ``scene_node_`` accordingly.
This ensures that the visualization does not always appear relative to the fixed frame.
```

* The actual visualization that we've been building up to is in the last four lines: we set the position of the visualization to match the message's position.

The result should look like this:

.. image:: images/Step2A.png
   :target: images/Step2A.png
   :alt: screenshot of functioning display

If the box does not appear in that location, it might be because:

* You are not publishing the topic at this time
* The message hasn't been published in the last 2 seconds.
* You did not properly set the topic in RViz.

It's Nice to Have Options.
--------------------------

If you want to allow users to customize different properties of the visualization, you need to add `rviz_common::Property objects <https://github.com/ros2/rviz/tree/ros2/rviz_common/include/rviz_common/properties>`_.

You can view the full version of this step with the branch name ``step3``.

Header Updates
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

> * ``#include <rviz_common/properties/color_property.hpp>`` Color is but one of many properties you can set.
> 
> .. code-block:: c++
> 
>   private Q_SLOTS:
>     void updateStyle();
> 
> * This gets called whenever the gui is changed, via Qt's SLOT/SIGNAL framework.
> * ``std::unique_ptr<rviz_common::properties::ColorProperty> color_property_;`` The property itself.

Reviewer 2: I find the layout of this section a bit confusing.  I think we should do something more like:

```suggestion

Include the header file for color properties: ``#include <rviz_common/properties/color_property.hpp>``.
Color is but one of many properties you can set.

Add in the prototype for ``updateStyle``, which is called whenever the GUI is changed via Qt's SIGNAL/SLOT framework:

.. code-block:: c++

  private Q_SLOTS:
    void updateStyle();

Add in a new property to store the property itself: ``std::unique_ptr<rviz_common::properties::ColorProperty> color_property_;``
```

     } else {
       setStatus(StatusProperty::Ok, "Message", "OK");
     }

* We're assuming a previous ``using rviz_common::properties::StatusProperty;`` declaration.
* Think of the status as Key/Value pairs, with the key being some string (here we're using ``"Message"``\ ) and the values are the status level (error/warn/ok) and the description (some other string).

.. image:: images/Step4A.png
   :target: images/Step4A.png
   :alt: screenshot with ok status

.. image:: images/Step4B.png
   :target: images/Step4B.png
   :alt: screenshot with warning status

Cleanup
-------

Now its time to clean it up a bit.
This makes things look nicer and be a little easier to use, but aren't strictly required.
You can view the full version of this step with the branch name ``step5``.

First, we update the plugin declaration.

.. code-block:: xml

   <library path="point_display">
     <class name="Point2D" type="rviz_plugin_tutorial::PointDisplay" base_class_type="rviz_common::Display">
       <description>Tutorial to display a point</description>
       <message_type>rviz_plugin_tutorial_msgs/msg/Point2D</message_type>
     </class>
   </library>

> * We add the ``name`` field to the ``class`` tag. This changes the name that is displayed in RViz. In code, it makes sense to call it a ``PointDisplay`` but in RViz, we want to simplify.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* We add the ``name`` field to the ``class`` tag.
This changes the name that is displayed in RViz. In code, it makes sense to call it a ``PointDisplay`` but in RViz, we want to simplify.
```

Author: ```suggestion
* We add the ``name`` field to the ``class`` tag.
This changes the name that is displayed in RViz.
In code, it makes sense to call it a ``PointDisplay`` but in RViz, we want to simplify.
```

Building a Custom RViz Display
==============================

Background
----------
There are many types of data that have existing visualizations in RViz. However, if there is a message type that does
not yet have a plugin to display it, there are two choices to see it in RViz.

 1. Convert the message to another type, such as `visualization_msgs/Marker`.
 2. Write a Custom RViz Display.

With the first option, there is more network traffic and limitations to how the data can be represented. It is also quick and flexible.
The latter option is explained in this tutorial. It takes a bit of work, but can lead to much richer visualizations.

> All of the code for this tutorial can be found in `this repository <https://github.com/MetroRobots/rviz_plugin_tutorial>`__.

Reviewer 2: I couldn't find https://github.com/MetroRobots/rviz_plugin_tutorial ; is it a private repository or something?

Author: Public now, sorry.
